docs/storage_transformers/sharding/v1.0.rst, before:

.. _sharding-storage-transformer-v1:

==========================================
Sharding storage transformer (version 1.0)
==========================================
-----------------------------
 Editor's draft 18 02 2022
-----------------------------

Specification URI:
    @@TODO
    http://purl.org/zarr/spec/storage_transformers/sharding/1.0
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/storage_transformers-sharding-v1.0>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/docs/storage_transformers/sharding/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2022 `Zarr core development
team <https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_ (@@TODO
list institutions?). This work is licensed under a `Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported
License <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification defines an implementation of the Zarr
storage transformer protocol for sharding.

Sharding co-locates multiple chunks within a storage object, bundling them in shards.


Motivation
==========

In many cases it becomes inefficient or impractical to store a large number of chunks in
single files or objects due to the design constraints of the underlying storage,
for example as restricted by the file block size and maximum inode number for typical file systems.

Increasing the chunk size works only up to a certain point, as chunk sizes need to be small for
read efficiency requirements, for example to stream data in browser-based visualization software.

Therefore, chunks may need to be smaller than the minimum size of one storage key.
In those cases it is efficient to store objects at a more coarse granularity than reading chunks.
Sharding solves this by allowing to store multiple chunks in one storage key, which is called a shard:

.. image:: sharding.png


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Configuration
=============

Sharding can be configured per array in the :ref:`array-metadata`:

.. code-block::

    {
      storage_transformers: [
        {
          "storage_transformer": "https://purl.org/zarr/spec/storage_transformers/sharding/1.0",
          "configuration": {
            "format": "indexed",
            "chunks_per_shard": [
                2,
                2
            ]
          }
      ]
    }

``format``

    Specifies a `Binary shard format`_. In this version, the only binary format is the
    ``indexed`` format.

``chunks_per_shard``

    An array of integers providing the number of chunks that are combined in a shard
    for each dimension of the Zarr array, where each chunk may only start at a position
    that is divisble by ``chunks_per_shard`` per dimension, e.g. starting at the zero-origin.
    The length of the array must match the length of the array metadata ``shape`` entry.
    For example, a value ``[32, 2]`` indicates that 64 chunks are combined in one shard,
    32 along the first dimension, and for each of those 2 along the second dimension.
    Valid starting positions for a shard in the chunk-grid are therefore ``[0, 0]``,
    ``[32, 2]``, ``[32, 4]``, ``[64, 2]`` or ``[96, 18]``.


Storage transformer implementation
==================================

Key & value transformation
--------------------------

The storage transformer protocol defines the abstract interface to be the same
as the :ref:`abstract-store-interface`.

The Zarr store interface is defined as a mapping of `keys` and `values`,
where a `key` is a sequence of characters and a `value` is a sequence
of bytes. A key-value pair is called `entry` in the following part.

This sharding transformer only adapts entries where the key starts
with `data/root`, as they indicate data keys for array chunks, see
:ref:`storage-keys`. All other entries are simply passed on.

Entries starting with ``data/root`` are grouped by their common shard, assuming
storage keys from a regular chunk grid which may use a customly configured
``chunk separator``:
For all entries that are part of the same shard the key is changed to the
shard-key and the values are combined in the `Binary shard format`_ described
below. The new shard-key is the chunk key divided by ``chunks_per_shard`` and
floored per dimension. For example for ``chunks_per_shard=[32, 2]``, the chunk grid
position ``[96, 18]`` (e.g. key "data/root/foo/baz/c96/18") is transformed to
the shard grid position ``[3, 9]`` and reassigned to the respective new key,
honoring the original chunk separator (e.g. "data/root/foo/baz/c3/9").
Chunk grid positions ``[96, 19]``, ``[97, 18]``, …, up to ``[127, 19]`` will
also have the same shard grid position ``[3, 9]``.


Binary shard format
-------------------

The only binary format is the ``indexed`` format, as specified by the ``format``
configuration key. Other binary formats might be added in future versions.

In the indexed binary format chunks are written successively in a shard, where
unused space between them is allowed, followed by an index referencing them.
The index is placed at the end of the file and has a length of 16 bytes multiplied by the number of chunks
in a shard, for example ``16 bytes * 64 = 1014 bytes`` for ``chunks_per_shard=[32, 2]``.
The index holds an `offset, length` pair of little-endian uint64 per chunk,
the chunks-order in the index is row-major (C) order, for example for
``chunks_per_shard=[2, 2]`` an index would look like:

.. code-block::

    | chunk (0, 0)    | chunk (0, 1)    | chunk (1, 0)    | chunk (1, 1)    |
    | offset | length | offset | length | offset | length | offset | length |
    | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 |


Empty chunks are denoted by setting both offset and length to ``2^64 - 1``.
The index always has the full shape of all possible chunks per shard,
even if they are outside of the array size.

The actual order of the chunk-content is not fixed and may be chosen by the implementation
as all possible write orders are valid according to this specification and therefore can
be read by any other implementation. When writing partial chunks into an existing shard no
specific order of the existing chunks may be expected. Some writing strategies might be

* **Fixed order**: Specify a fixed order (e.g. row-, column-major or Morton order).
  When replacing existing chunks larger or equal sized chunks may be replaced in-place,
  leaving unused space up to an upper limit  which might possibly be specified.
  Please note that for regular-sized uncompressed data all chunks have the same size and
  can therefore be replaced in-place.
* **Append-only**: Any chunk to write is appended to the existing shard,
  followed by an updated index.

Any configuration parameters for the write strategy must not be part of the metadata document,
they need to be configured at runtime, as this is implementation specific.


API implementation
------------------

The section below defines an implementation of the
:ref:`abstract-store-interface` in terms of the operations of this
storage transformer as a ``StoreWithPartialAccess``.
The term `underlying store` references either the next storage transformer
in the stack or the actual store if this transformer is the last one in the
stack. Any operations with keys not starting with ``data/root`` are simply
relayed to the underlying store and not described explicitly.

* ``get_partial_values(key_ranges) -> values``:
  For each referenced key, request the indices from the underlying store using
  ``get_partial_values``. For each `key`, `range` pair in in `key_ranges`,
  check if the chunk exists by checking if the index offset and length
  are both ``2^64 - 1``. For existing keys, request the actual chunks by
  their ranges as read from the index using ``get_partial_values``.
  This operation should be implemented using two ``get_partial_values``
  operations on the underlying store, one for retrieving the indices and
  one for retrieving existing chunks.

* ``set_partial_values(key_start_values)`` :
  For each referenced key, check if all available chunks in a shard are
  referenced. In this case a shard can be constructed according to the
  `Binary shard format`_ directly.
  For all other keys, request the indices from the underlying store using
  ``get_partial_values``. All chunks that are not updated completely and
  exist according to the index (index offset and length are both
  ``2^64 - 1``) need to be read via ``get_partial_values`` from the
  underlying store. For simplification purposes a shard may also be read
  completely, combining the previous two `get` operations into one.
  Based on the existing chunks and value ranges that need to be updated
  new shards are constructed according to the `Binary shard format`_.
  All shards that need to be updated must now be set via ``set`` or
  ``set_partial_values(key_start_values)``, depending one the chosen
  writing strategy provided by the implementation.
  Specialized store implementations that allow appending to a storage
  object may only need to read the index to update it.

* ``erase_values(keys)`` :
  For each referenced key, check if all available chunks in a shard are
  referenced. In this case the full shard is removed using ``erase_values``
  on the underlying store.
  For all other keys, request the indices from the underlying
  store using ``get_partial_values``. Update the index using and offset and
  length of ``2^64 - 1`` to mark missing chunks. The updated index may be
  be written in-place using ``set_partial_values(key_start_values)``,
  or a larger rewrite of the shard may be done including the index update,
  but also removing value ranges corresponding to the erased chunks.

* ``erase_prefix()`` : If the prefix contains a part of the chunk-grid
  key, this part is translated to the referenced shard and contained chunks.
  For affected shards where all contained chunks are erased the prefix is
  rewritten to the corresponding shard key and the operation is relayed to
  the underlying store.
  For all shards where only some chunks are erased the affected chunks
  are removed by invoking the operation ``erase_values`` on this
  storage transformer with the respective chunk keys.

* ``list()``: See ``list_prefix`` with the prefix ``/``.

* ``list_prefix(prefix)`` : If the prefix contains a part of the chunk-grid
  key, this part is translated to the referenced shard and contained chunks.
  Then, ``list_prefix`` is called on the underlying store with the translated
  prefix. For all listed shards request the indices from the underlying store
  using ``get_partial_values``. Existing chunks, where the index offset or
  length are not ``2^64 - 1`` are then listed by their original key.

* ``list_dir(prefix)`` : If the prefix contains a part of the chunk-grid
  key, this part is translated to the referenced shard and contained chunks.
  Then, ``list_dir`` is called on the underlying store with the translated
  prefix. For all *retrieved prefixes* (not full keys) with partial shard keys,
  the corresponding original prefixes covering all possible chunks in the shard
  are listed. For *retrieved full keys* the the indices from the underlying store
  are requested using ``get_partial_values``. Existing chunks, where the index
  offset or length are not ``2^64 - 1`` are then listed by their original key.

  .. note::
    Not all listed prefixes must necessarily contain keys, as shard prefixes with
    partially available chunks return prefixes for all possible chunks without
    verifying their exisence for performance reasons. Listing those prefixes
    is still safe as some chunks in their corresponding shard exist, but not
    necessarily in the requested prefix, possibly leading to empty responses.
    Please note, this only applies for returned prefixes, *not* for full keys
    referencing storage objects. Returned full keys always reflect the actually
    available chunks and are safe to request.


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119


Change log
==========

@@TODO

Commit message:

use nbytes instead of length in the index description

docs/storage_transformers/sharding/v1.0.rst, after:

.. _sharding-storage-transformer-v1:

==========================================
Sharding storage transformer (version 1.0)
==========================================
-----------------------------
 Editor's draft 18 02 2022
-----------------------------

Specification URI:
    @@TODO
    http://purl.org/zarr/spec/storage_transformers/sharding/1.0
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/storage_transformers-sharding-v1.0>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/docs/storage_transformers/sharding/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2022 `Zarr core development
team <https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_ (@@TODO
list institutions?). This work is licensed under a `Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported
License <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification defines an implementation of the Zarr
storage transformer protocol for sharding.

Sharding co-locates multiple chunks within a storage object, bundling them in shards.


Motivation
==========

In many cases it becomes inefficient or impractical to store a large number of chunks in
single files or objects due to the design constraints of the underlying storage,
for example as restricted by the file block size and maximum inode number for typical file systems.

Increasing the chunk size works only up to a certain point, as chunk sizes need to be small for
read efficiency requirements, for example to stream data in browser-based visualization software.

Therefore, chunks may need to be smaller than the minimum size of one storage key.
In those cases it is efficient to store objects at a more coarse granularity than reading chunks.
Sharding solves this by allowing to store multiple chunks in one storage key, which is called a shard:

.. image:: sharding.png


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Configuration
=============

Sharding can be configured per array in the :ref:`array-metadata`:

.. code-block::

    {
      storage_transformers: [
        {
          "storage_transformer": "https://purl.org/zarr/spec/storage_transformers/sharding/1.0",
          "configuration": {
            "format": "indexed",
            "chunks_per_shard": [
                2,
                2
            ]
          }
      ]
    }

``format``

    Specifies a `Binary shard format`_. In this version, the only binary format is the
    ``indexed`` format.

``chunks_per_shard``

    An array of integers providing the number of chunks that are combined in a shard
    for each dimension of the Zarr array, where each chunk may only start at a position
    that is divisble by ``chunks_per_shard`` per dimension, e.g. starting at the zero-origin.
    The length of the array must match the length of the array metadata ``shape`` entry.
    For example, a value ``[32, 2]`` indicates that 64 chunks are combined in one shard,
    32 along the first dimension, and for each of those 2 along the second dimension.
    Valid starting positions for a shard in the chunk-grid are therefore ``[0, 0]``,
    ``[32, 2]``, ``[32, 4]``, ``[64, 2]`` or ``[96, 18]``.


Storage transformer implementation
==================================

Key & value transformation
--------------------------

The storage transformer protocol defines the abstract interface to be the same
as the :ref:`abstract-store-interface`.

The Zarr store interface is defined as a mapping of `keys` and `values`,
where a `key` is a sequence of characters and a `value` is a sequence
of bytes. A key-value pair is called `entry` in the following part.

This sharding transformer only adapts entries where the key starts
with `data/root`, as they indicate data keys for array chunks, see
:ref:`storage-keys`. All other entries are simply passed on.

Entries starting with ``data/root`` are grouped by their common shard, assuming
storage keys from a regular chunk grid which may use a customly configured
``chunk separator``:
For all entries that are part of the same shard the key is changed to the
shard-key and the values are combined in the `Binary shard format`_ described
below. The new shard-key is the chunk key divided by ``chunks_per_shard`` and
floored per dimension. For example for ``chunks_per_shard=[32, 2]``, the chunk grid
position ``[96, 18]`` (e.g. key "data/root/foo/baz/c96/18") is transformed to
the shard grid position ``[3, 9]`` and reassigned to the respective new key,
honoring the original chunk separator (e.g. "data/root/foo/baz/c3/9").
Chunk grid positions ``[96, 19]``, ``[97, 18]``, …, up to ``[127, 19]`` will
also have the same shard grid position ``[3, 9]``.


Binary shard format
-------------------

The only binary format is the ``indexed`` format, as specified by the ``format``
configuration key. Other binary formats might be added in future versions.

In the indexed binary format chunks are written successively in a shard, where
unused space between them is allowed, followed by an index referencing them.
The index is placed at the end of the file and has a size of 16 bytes multiplied by the number of chunks
in a shard, for example ``16 bytes * 64 = 1014 bytes`` for ``chunks_per_shard=[32, 2]``.
The index holds an `offset, nbytes` pair of little-endian uint64 per chunk,
the chunks-order in the index is row-major (C) order, for example for
``chunks_per_shard=[2, 2]`` an index would look like:

.. code-block::

    | chunk (0, 0)    | chunk (0, 1)    | chunk (1, 0)    | chunk (1, 1)    |
    | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes |
    | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 |


Empty chunks are denoted by setting both offset and nbytes to ``2^64 - 1``.
The index always has the full shape of all possible chunks per shard,
even if they are outside of the array size.

The actual order of the chunk-content is not fixed and may be chosen by the implementation
as all possible write orders are valid according to this specification and therefore can
be read by any other implementation. When writing partial chunks into an existing shard no
specific order of the existing chunks may be expected. Some writing strategies might be

* **Fixed order**: Specify a fixed order (e.g. row-, column-major or Morton order).
  When replacing existing chunks larger or equal sized chunks may be replaced in-place,
  leaving unused space up to an upper limit  which might possibly be specified.
  Please note that for regular-sized uncompressed data all chunks have the same size and
  can therefore be replaced in-place.
* **Append-only**: Any chunk to write is appended to the existing shard,
  followed by an updated index.

Any configuration parameters for the write strategy must not be part of the metadata document,
they need to be configured at runtime, as this is implementation specific.


API implementation
------------------

The section below defines an implementation of the
:ref:`abstract-store-interface` in terms of the operations of this
storage transformer as a ``StoreWithPartialAccess``.
The term `underlying store` references either the next storage transformer
in the stack or the actual store if this transformer is the last one in the
stack. Any operations with keys not starting with ``data/root`` are simply
relayed to the underlying store and not described explicitly.

* ``get_partial_values(key_ranges) -> values``:
  For each referenced key, request the indices from the underlying store using
  ``get_partial_values``. For each `key`, `range` pair in in `key_ranges`,
  check if the chunk exists by checking if the index offset and nbytes
  are both ``2^64 - 1``. For existing keys, request the actual chunks by
  their ranges as read from the index using ``get_partial_values``.
  This operation should be implemented using two ``get_partial_values``
  operations on the underlying store, one for retrieving the indices and
  one for retrieving existing chunks.

* ``set_partial_values(key_start_values)`` :
  For each referenced key, check if all available chunks in a shard are
  referenced. In this case a shard can be constructed according to the
  `Binary shard format`_ directly.
  For all other keys, request the indices from the underlying store using
  ``get_partial_values``. All chunks that are not updated completely and
  exist according to the index (index offset and nbytes are both
  ``2^64 - 1``) need to be read via ``get_partial_values`` from the
  underlying store. For simplification purposes a shard may also be read
  completely, combining the previous two `get` operations into one.
  Based on the existing chunks and value ranges that need to be updated
  new shards are constructed according to the `Binary shard format`_.
  All shards that need to be updated must now be set via ``set`` or
  ``set_partial_values(key_start_values)``, depending one the chosen
  writing strategy provided by the implementation.
  Specialized store implementations that allow appending to a storage
  object may only need to read the index to update it.

* ``erase_values(keys)`` :
  For each referenced key, check if all available chunks in a shard are
  referenced. In this case the full shard is removed using ``erase_values``
  on the underlying store.
  For all other keys, request the indices from the underlying
  store using ``get_partial_values``. Update the index using and offset and
  nbytes of ``2^64 - 1`` to mark missing chunks. The updated index may be
  be written in-place using ``set_partial_values(key_start_values)``,
  or a larger rewrite of the shard may be done including the index update,
  but also removing value ranges corresponding to the erased chunks.

* ``erase_prefix()`` : If the prefix contains a part of the chunk-grid
  key, this part is translated to the referenced shard and contained chunks.
  For affected shards where all contained chunks are erased the prefix is
  rewritten to the corresponding shard key and the operation is relayed to
  the underlying store.
  For all shards where only some chunks are erased the affected chunks
  are removed by invoking the operation ``erase_values`` on this
  storage transformer with the respective chunk keys.

* ``list()``: See ``list_prefix`` with the prefix ``/``.

* ``list_prefix(prefix)`` : If the prefix contains a part of the chunk-grid
  key, this part is translated to the referenced shard and contained chunks.
  Then, ``list_prefix`` is called on the underlying store with the translated
  prefix. For all listed shards request the indices from the underlying store
  using ``get_partial_values``. Existing chunks, where the index offset or
  nbytes are not ``2^64 - 1`` are then listed by their original key.

* ``list_dir(prefix)`` : If the prefix contains a part of the chunk-grid
  key, this part is translated to the referenced shard and contained chunks.
  Then, ``list_dir`` is called on the underlying store with the translated
  prefix. For all *retrieved prefixes* (not full keys) with partial shard keys,
  the corresponding original prefixes covering all possible chunks in the shard
  are listed. For *retrieved full keys* the the indices from the underlying store
  are requested using ``get_partial_values``. Existing chunks, where the index
  offset or nbytes are not ``2^64 - 1`` are then listed by their original key.

  .. note::
    Not all listed prefixes must necessarily contain keys, as shard prefixes with
    partially available chunks return prefixes for all possible chunks without
    verifying their exisence for performance reasons. Listing those prefixes
    is still safe as some chunks in their corresponding shard exist, but not
    necessarily in the requested prefix, possibly leading to empty responses.
    Please note, this only applies for returned prefixes, *not* for full keys
    referencing storage objects. Returned full keys always reflect the actually
    available chunks and are safe to request.


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119


Change log
==========

@@TODO
