.. _endian-codec-v1:

============================
 Endian codec (version 1.0)
============================

  **Editor's draft 26 July 2019**

Specification URI:
    https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/codecs/endian/v1.0.html
Corresponding ZEP:
    `ZEP 1 — Zarr specification version 3 <https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0001.html>`_
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/codec>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/main/docs/v3/codecs/endian/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2020 `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_. This work
is licensed under a `Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification defines an implementation of the Zarr abstract
store API using a file system.


Status of this document
=======================

.. warning::
    This document is a draft for review and subject to changes.
    It will become final when the `Zarr Enhancement Proposal (ZEP) 1 <https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0001.html>`_
    is approved via the `ZEP process <https://zarr.dev/zeps/active/ZEP0000.html>`_.


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Configuration parameters
========================

endian:
    Required.  A string equal to either ``"big"`` or ``"little"``.


Format and algorithm
====================

Each element of the array is encoded using the specified endian variant of its
default binary representation.  Array elements are encoded in lexicographical
order.  For example, with ``endian`` specified as ``big``, the ``int32`` data
type is encoded as a 4-byte big endian two's complement integer, and the
``complex128`` data type is encoded as two consecutive 8-byte big endian IEEE
754 binary64 values.

.. note::

   Since the default binary representation of all data types is little endian,
   specifying this codec with ``endian`` equal to ``"little"`` is equivalent to
   omitting this codec, because if this codec is omitted, the default binary
   representation of the data type, which is always little endian, is used
   instead.


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119


Change log
==========

No changes yet.
