===================================
 Datetime data types (version 1.0)
===================================

  **Editor's draft 11 June 2019**

Specification URI:
    https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/data-types/datetime/v1.0.html
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/data-type>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/main/docs/v3/data-types/datetime/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2019 `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_. This work is
licensed under a `Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification is a Zarr protocol extension defining data types
for datetimes (moment in time) and timedeltas (difference between two
datetimes).


Status of this document
=======================

.. warning::
    This document is a **Work in Progress**. It may be updated, replaced
    or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappapropriate to
    cite this document as other than work in progress.

Comments, questions or contributions to this document are very
welcome. Comments and questions should be raised via `GitHub issues
<https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/data-type>`_. When
raising an issue, please add the label "datetime-dtypes-v1.0".

This document was produced by the `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_.


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Extension data types
====================

Two extension data types are defined to represent datetime and
timedelta values. The definitions of these data types are based on the
datetime64 and timedelta64 data types as described in [NumPy]_, but
are intended to be portable across Zarr implementations in different
programming languages.

Datetime
--------

The datetime data type represents a single moment in time. It is a
logical data type based on the 64-bit integer data type, with
associated `Units`_. Datetimes are always stored based on POSIX time,
with an epoch of 1970-01-01T00:00Z. This means the supported dates are
always a symmetric interval around the epoch, called "time span" in
the `Units`_ table below.

The length of the span is the range of a 64-bit integer times the
length of the date or unit. For example, the time span for 'W' (week)
is exactly 7 times longer than the time span for 'D' (day), and the
time span for 'D' (day) is exactly 24 times longer than the time span
for 'h' (hour).

Timedelta
---------

The timedelta data type represents a difference between two
datatimes. It is a logical data type based on the 64-bit integer data
type, with associated `Units`_. Note that two timedelta units ('Y',
years and 'M', months) represent different amounts of time depending
on when they are used. E.g., While a timedelta day unit is equivalent
to 24 hours, there is no way to convert a month unit into days,
because different months have different numbers of days.


Units
=====

====  ============  ====================  ======================
Code  Meaning       Time span (relative)  Time span (absolute)
====  ============  ====================  ======================
Y     year          +/- 9.2e18 years      [9.2e18 BCE, 9.2e18 CE]
M     month         +/- 7.6e17 years      [7.6e17 BCE, 7.6e17 CE]
W     week          +/- 1.7e17 years      [1.7e17 BCE, 1.7e17 CE]
D     day           +/- 2.5e16 years      [2.5e16 BCE, 2.5e16 CE]
h     hour          +/- 1.0e15 years      [1.0e15 BCE, 1.0e15 CE]
m     minute        +/- 1.7e13 years      [1.7e13 BCE, 1.7e13 CE]
s     second        +/- 2.9e11 years      [2.9e11 BCE, 2.9e11 CE]
ms    millisecond   +/- 2.9e8 years       [ 2.9e8 BCE, 2.9e8 CE]
us    microsecond   +/- 2.9e5 years       [290301 BCE, 294241 CE]
ns    nanosecond    +/- 292 years         [1678 CE, 2262 CE]
ps    picosecond    +/- 106 days          [1969 CE, 1970 CE]
fs    femtosecond   +/- 2.6 hours         [1969 CE, 1970 CE]
as    attosecond    +/- 9.2 seconds       [1969 CE, 1970 CE]
====  ============  ====================  ======================


Data type identifiers
=====================

An identifier for a datetime data type is constructed from the string
pattern "[endianness]M8[[units]]" where `endianness` is either "<"
(little-endian) or ">" (big-endian) and `units` is one of the unit
codes defined above. The endianness and units must be given. E.g.,
"<M8[ns]" identifies a little-endian datatime data type with
nanosecond units.

An identifier for a timedelta data type is constructed from the string
pattern "[endianness]m8[[units]]" where `endianness` is either "<"
(little-endian) or ">" (big-endian) and `units` is one of the unit
codes defined above. The endianness and units must be given. E.g.,
"<m8[ns]" identifies a little-endian timedelta data type with
nanosecond units.


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119

.. [NumPy] NumPy Datetimes and Timedeltas. NumPy version 1.16.0
   documentation. URL:
   https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy-1.16.0/reference/arrays.datetime.html

				    
Change log
==========

@@TODO
