=========================================
 Complex number data types (version 1.0)
=========================================
-----------------------------
 Editor's draft 11 June 2019
-----------------------------

Specification URI:
    http://purl.org/zarr/spec/extensions/complex-dtypes/1.0
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/complex-dtypes-v1.0>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/docs/extension/complex-dtypes/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2019 `Zarr core development
team <https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_ (@@TODO
list institutions?). This work is licensed under a `Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported
License <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification is a Zarr extension defining data types
for complex numbers.


Status of this document
=======================

This document is a **Work in Progress**. It may be updated, replaced
or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappapropriate to
cite this document as other than work in progress.

Comments, questions or contributions to this document are very
welcome. Comments and questions should be raised via `GitHub issues
<https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/complex-dtypes-v1.0>`_. When
raising an issue, please add the label "complex-dtypes-v1.0".

This document was produced by the `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_.


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Extension data types
====================

@@TODO define complex data types


Data type identifiers
=====================

@@TODO define identifiers for complex data types


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119

				    
Change log
==========

@@TODO
