docs/codecs/gzip/v1.0.rst, before:

========================
Gzip Codec (version 1.0)
========================
-----------------------------
 Editor's draft 31 March 2020
-----------------------------

Specification URI:
    https://purl.org/zarr/spec/codecs/gzip/1.0
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/codecs-gzip-v1.0>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/docs/codecs/gzip/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2020 `Zarr core development
team <https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_ (@@TODO
list institutions?). This work is licensed under a `Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported
License <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification defines an codec for chunk compression using Gzip


Status of this document
=======================

This document is a **Work in Progress**. It may be updated, replaced
or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappapropriate to
cite this document as other than work in progress.

Comments, questions or contributions to this document are very
welcome. Comments and questions should be raised via `GitHub issues
<https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/codecs-gzip-v1.0>`_. When
raising an issue, please add the label "codecs-gzip-v1.0".

This document was produced by the `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_.


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Chunk encoding/decoding with Gzip
=================================

@@TODO define how chunks are encoded and decoded

Chunks are encoded and decoded using the Gzip compression algorithm defined in
[RFC1951]_ and [RFC1952]_. The compression level is an integer from 0 to 9
which controls the speed and level of compression. A level of 1 is the fastest
compression method and produces the least compressions, while 9 is slowest and
produces the most compression. Compression is turned off completely when level is 0.


Configuring codec in array metadata
===================================

@@TODO define how to specify in array metadata documents.

The Gzip codec can be specified as a compressor for a Zarr array under the
``compressor`` name in the corresponding array metadata document. The URI for
the Gzip codec defined in this specification is
https://purl.org/zarr/spec/codecs/gzip/1.0.

Additionally, the compression level must be specified as the value of the
``level`` name in the ``configuration`` metadata name. For example, the array
metadata document below specifies a Gzip codec configured with a compression
level of 1::


    {
        "compressor": {
            "codec": "http://purl.org/zarr/spec/codecs/gzip/1.0",
            "configuration": {
                "level": 1
            }
        },
    }


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119

.. [RFC1951] P. Deutsch. DEFLATE Compressed Data Format Specification version
   1.3. Requirement Levels. May 1996. Informational. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1951

.. [RFC1952] P. Deutsch. GZIP file format specification version 4.3.
   Requirement Levels. May 1996. Informational. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1952



Change log
==========

@@TODO

Commit message:

Add TODO about gzip file format

docs/codecs/gzip/v1.0.rst, after:

========================
Gzip Codec (version 1.0)
========================
-----------------------------
 Editor's draft 31 March 2020
-----------------------------

Specification URI:
    https://purl.org/zarr/spec/codecs/gzip/1.0
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/codecs-gzip-v1.0>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/docs/codecs/gzip/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2020 `Zarr core development
team <https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_ (@@TODO
list institutions?). This work is licensed under a `Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported
License <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification defines an codec for chunk compression using Gzip


Status of this document
=======================

This document is a **Work in Progress**. It may be updated, replaced
or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappapropriate to
cite this document as other than work in progress.

Comments, questions or contributions to this document are very
welcome. Comments and questions should be raised via `GitHub issues
<https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/codecs-gzip-v1.0>`_. When
raising an issue, please add the label "codecs-gzip-v1.0".

This document was produced by the `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_.


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Chunk encoding/decoding with Gzip
=================================

@@TODO define how chunks are encoded and decoded
@@TODO be sure to clarify that the encoded data should conform to the gzip file format

Chunks are encoded and decoded using the compression algorithm defined in
[RFC1951]_ and encoded data should conform to the Gzip file format [RFC1952]_.
The compression level is an integer from 0 to 9 which controls the speed and
level of compression. A level of 1 is the fastest compression method and
produces the least compressions, while 9 is slowest and produces the most
compression. Compression is turned off completely when level is 0.


Configuring codec in array metadata
===================================

@@TODO define how to specify in array metadata documents.

The Gzip codec can be specified as a compressor for a Zarr array under the
``compressor`` name in the corresponding array metadata document. The URI for
the Gzip codec defined in this specification is
https://purl.org/zarr/spec/codecs/gzip/1.0.

Additionally, the compression level must be specified as the value of the
``level`` name in the ``configuration`` metadata name. For example, the array
metadata document below specifies a Gzip codec configured with a compression
level of 1::


    {
        "compressor": {
            "codec": "http://purl.org/zarr/spec/codecs/gzip/1.0",
            "configuration": {
                "level": 1
            }
        },
    }


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119

.. [RFC1951] P. Deutsch. DEFLATE Compressed Data Format Specification version
   1.3. Requirement Levels. May 1996. Informational. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1951

.. [RFC1952] P. Deutsch. GZIP file format specification version 4.3.
   Requirement Levels. May 1996. Informational. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1952



Change log
==========

@@TODO
