==========================
 Zstd codec (version 1.0)
==========================

  **Editor's draft 26 July 2019**

Specification URI:
    https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/codecs/zstd/v1.0.html
Corresponding ZEP:
    `ZEP 1 — Zarr specification version 3 <https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0001.html>`_
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/codec>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/main/docs/v3/codecs/zstd/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2020 `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_. This work
is licensed under a `Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

Defines a ``bytes -> bytes`` codec that applies zstd compression.


Status of this document
=======================

.. warning::
    This document is a draft for review and subject to changes.
    It will become final when the `Zarr Enhancement Proposal (ZEP) 1 <https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0001.html>`_
    is approved via the `ZEP process <https://zarr.dev/zeps/active/ZEP0000.html>`_.


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Codec name
==========

The value of the ``name`` member in the codec object MUST be ``zstd``.


Configuration parameters
========================

level:
    An integer from -131072 to 22 which controls the speed and level
    of compression (has no impact on decoding).  A value of 0 indicates to use
    the default compression level.  Otherwise, a higher level is expected to
    achieve a higher compression ratio at the cost of lower speed.

checksum:
    A boolean that indicates whether to store a checksum when writing that will
    be verified when reading.

For example, the array metadata below specifies that the compressor is the Zstd
codec configured with a compression level of 1 and with the checksum stored::

    {
        "codecs": [{
            "name": "zstd",
            "configuration": {
                "level": 1,
                "checksum": true
            }
        }],
    }


Format and algorithm
====================

This is a ``bytes -> bytes`` codec.

Encoded data should conform to the Zstandard file format [RFC8878]_.

References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119

.. [RFC8878] Y. Collet. Zstandard Compression and the
   'application/zstd' Media Type. Februrary 2021. Informational. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8878

Change log
==========

No changes yet.
