===================================
 Struct data types (version 1.0)
===================================

  **Editor's draft 2 March 2022**

Specification URI:
    https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/data-types/struct/v1.0.html
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/data-type>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/main/docs/v3/data-types/struct/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2022 `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_. This work is
licensed under a `Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification is a Zarr extension defining data types
for structured arrays. It is an early draft and currently just describes existing support for NumPy-style `structured arrays`_ that already have support in
zarr-python, but are not part of the core Zarr v3 spec.


Status of this document
=======================

.. warning::
    This document is a **Work in Progress**. It may be updated, replaced
    or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappapropriate to
    cite this document as other than work in progress.

Comments, questions or contributions to this document are very
welcome. Comments and questions should be raised via `GitHub issues
<https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/data-type>`_. When
raising an issue, please add the label "struct-dtypes-v1.0".

This document was produced by the `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_.


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Extension data types
====================

NumPy allows representation of `Structured Arrays`_ where each element of the
array is actually some combination of fields, each of which may have its own
unique data type. NumPy's Record Arrays (``numpy.recarray``) also use this data type. The actual data is stored as an opaque sequence of bytes
(i.e. a structure) as represented by (``numpy.void``) and thus the string
representation of this dtype in NumPy is ``'|Vn'`` where ``n`` is some integer
number of bytes. In order to be able to properly interpret data of this type
if is necessary to store information on the fields

A concrete example of such an array from the NumPy docs is::

    dogs = np.array([('Rex', 9, 81.0), ('Fido', 3, 27.0)],
                    dtype=[('name', 'U10'), ('age', 'i4'), ('weight', 'f4')])

where here ``dogs.dtype.kind`` is 'V' and ``dogs.dtype.str`` is ``'|V48'``
indicating the 48 bytes are needed to store each element (4 bytes each for
``age`` and ``weight`` and 4 * 10 = 40 bytes for a 10-character UTF-32
``name``). If we were to read such a sequence of bytes from a Zarr array, we
need the dtype description to know how to properly interpret this sequence of
48 bytes. The NumPy dtype object has a ``descr`` attribute that describes this.
In this case ``dogs.dtype.descr`` is ``[('name', '<U10'), ('age', '<i4'), ('weight', '<f4')]``.


Data Types added by this extension
==================================

.. list-table:: Data types
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Identifier
     - Numerical type
     - Size (no. bytes)
     - Byte order
   * - list of (<name>, <type>) tuples
     - structure with named fields, each with possibly unique data type
     - sum over the size of the dtypes in the identifier
     - None

Here <field name> is the name of the struct field and <type> is any of the
scalar dtypes supported by the core Zarr v3 spec or the available extensions.
In the case of NumPy's structured arrays this identifier is simply
array's ``.dtype.descr`` attribute.


References
==========

.. [NumPy] NumPy Data type objects. NumPy version 1.22.0
   documentation. URL:
   https://numpy.org/doc/1.22/reference/arrays.dtypes.html

.. [NumPy Structured] Structured Arrays.
   documentation. URL:
   https://numpy.org/doc/1.22/user/basics.rec.html

Change log
==========

@@TODO


.. _structured arrays: https://numpy.org/doc/1.22/user/basics.rec.html
