===================================
 String data types (version 1.0)
===================================
-----------------------------
 Editor's draft 2 March 2022
-----------------------------

Specification URI:
    http://purl.org/zarr/spec/extensions/string-dtypes/1.0
Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/string-dtypes-v1.0>`_
Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/core-protocol-v3.0-dev/docs/extension/string-dtypes/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2022 `Zarr core development
team <https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_ (@@TODO
list institutions?). This work is licensed under a `Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported
License <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification is a Zarr extension defining data types
for strings. It is an early draft and currently just describes existing support
for NumPy string types that have already worked with zarr-python, but are not
part of the core v3 spec.


Status of this document
=======================

.. warning::
  This document is a **Work in Progress**. It may be updated, replaced
  or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappapropriate to
  cite this document as other than work in progress.

Comments, questions or contributions to this document are very
welcome. Comments and questions should be raised via `GitHub issues
<https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/string-dtypes-v1.0>`_. When
raising an issue, please add the label "string-dtypes-v1.0".

This document was produced by the `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_.


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of
descriptive assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in the normative
parts of this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in all
uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections
explicitly marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in
this specification are introduced with the words "for example".


Extension data types
====================

Two extension data types are defined to represent zero-terminated bytestrings as
well as fixed-length 32-bit unicode arrays.

Fixed length byte strings (zero-terminated)
-------------------------------------------

These are fixed width strings corresponding to NumPy dtypes with `kind` 'S'.
For backward compatibility with Python 2's ``str`` these are zero-terminated
bytes and correspond to
`numpy.bytes_ <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.scalars.html#numpy.bytes_>`
(or its alias
`numpy.string_ <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.scalars.html#numpy.bytes_>`.)

For example ``a = np.array(["a", "bcd", "efgh"], dtype="S4")`` creates an array where ``a.dtype.kind`` is 'S' and ``a.data.tobytes()`` is ``b'a\x00\x00\x00bcd\x00efgh'``. Note that any elements of length less than 4 characters were padded with zeros so that each array element uses 4 bytes (as
indicated by ``dtype="S4"``).


Fixed width unicode strings
---------------------------

These are fixed width strings corresponding to NumPy dtypes with `kind` 'U'.
These are zero-terminated bytes and correspond to
`numpy.str_ <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.scalars.html#numpy.str_>`
(or its alias
`numpy.unicode_ <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.scalars.html#numpy.unicode_>`.)

For example ``a = np.array(["a", "bcd", "efgh"], dtype="U4")`` creates an array where ``a.dtype.kind`` is 'U' and each element is a sequence of 4 characters where each character occupies 4 bytes (UTF-32).


Data Types added by this extension
==================================

.. list-table:: Data types
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Identifier
     - Numerical type
     - Size (no. bytes)
     - Byte order
   * - ``Sn``
     - ``n`` character fixed-width byte string
     - n
     - None
   * - ``<Un``
     - ``n`` character fixed-width unicode string (UTF-32)
     - 4n
     - little-endian
   * - ``>Un``
     - ``n`` character fixed-width unicode string (UTF-32)
     - 4n
     - big-endian


References
==========

.. [UTF-32] UTF-32 on Wikipedia.
   documentation. URL:
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-32

.. [NumPy] NumPy Data type objects. NumPy version 1.22.0
   documentation. URL:
   https://numpy.org/doc/1.22/reference/arrays.dtypes.html

				    
Change log
==========

@@TODO
