docs/v3/codecs/sharding-indexed/v1.0.rst, before:

.. _sharding-indexed-codec-v1:

==========================================
Sharding codec (version 1.0)
==========================================
-----------------------------
 Editor's draft 23 03 2023
-----------------------------

Specification URI:
    https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/codecs/sharding-indexed/v1.0.html

Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/sharding-indexed-codec-v1.0>`-

Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/main/docs/codecs/sharding-indexed/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2022-Present `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_. This work
is licensed under a `Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification defines a Zarr ``array -> bytes`` codec for sharding.

Sharding logically splits chunks ("shards") into sub-chunks ("inner chunks") 
that can be individually compressed and accessed. This allows to colocate 
multiple chunks within one storage object, bundling them in shards.


Motivation
==========

In many cases, it becomes inefficient or impractical to store a large number of
chunks as separate files or objects due to the design constraints of the
underlying storage. For example, the file block size and maximum inode number
restrict the usage of numerous small files for typical file systems, also cloud
storage such as S3, GCS, and various distributed filesystems do not efficiently
handle large numbers of small files or objects.

Increasing the chunk size works only up to a certain point, as chunk sizes need
to be small for read efficiency requirements, for example to stream data in 
browser-based visualization software.

Therefore, chunks may need to be smaller than the minimum size of one storage
key. In those cases, it is efficient to store objects at a more coarse
granularity than reading chunks.

**Sharding solves this by allowing to store multiple chunks in one storage key,
which is called a shard**:

.. image:: sharding.png


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of descriptive
assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT",
"REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" in the normative parts of this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in
all uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections explicitly
marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in this specification are
introduced with the words "for example".


Configuration parameters
========================

Sharding can be configured per array in the :ref:`array-metadata` as follows::

    {
      codecs: [
        {
          "name": "sharding_indexed"
          "configuration": {
            "chunk_shape": [32, 32],
            "codecs": [
              {
                "name": "gzip",
                "configuration": {
                  "level": 1
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }

``chunk_shape``

    An array of integers providing the shape of inner chunks in a shard for each 
    dimension of the Zarr array. The length of the array must match the length
    of the array metadata ``shape`` entry. The each integer must by divisible by 
    the ``chunk_shape`` of the array as defined in the ``chunk_grid`` 
    :ref:`array-metadata`. 
    For example, an inner chunk shape of ``[32, 2]`` with an outer chunk shape 
    ``[64, 64]`` indicates that 64 chunks are combined in one shard, 2 along the 
    first dimension, and for each of those 32 along the second dimension.
    Currently, only the ``regular`` chunk grid is supported.

``codecs``

    Specifies a list of codecs to be used for encoding and decoding inner chunks. 
    The value must be an array of objects, as specified in the 
    :ref:`array-metadata`. An absent ``codecs`` member is equivalent to 
    specifying an empty list of codecs.


Binary shard format
===================

This is an ``array -> bytes`` codec.

In the ``sharding_indexed`` binary format, chunks are written successively in a 
shard, where unused space between them is allowed, followed by an index 
referencing them. The index is placed at the end of the file and has a size of 
16 bytes multiplied by the number of chunks in a shard, for example 
``16 bytes * 4 = 1024 bytes`` for shard shape of ``[64, 64]`` and inner chunk 
shape of ``[32, 32]``. The index holds an `offset, nbytes` pair of little-endian 
uint64 per chunk, the chunks-order in the index is row-major (C) order. Given 
the example of 2x2 inner chunks in a shard, the index would look like::

    | chunk (0, 0)    | chunk (0, 1)    | chunk (1, 0)    | chunk (1, 1)    |
    | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes |
    | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 |

Empty chunks are denoted by setting both offset and nbytes to ``2^64 - 1``. 
Empty chunks are interpreted as being filled with the fill value. The index 
always has the full shape of all possible chunks per shard, even if they extend
beyond the array shape.

The actual order of the chunk content is not fixed and may be chosen by the
implementation. All possible write orders are valid according to this
specification and therefore can be read by any other implementation. When
writing partial chunks into an existing shard, no specific order of the existing
chunks may be expected. Some writing strategies might be

* **Fixed order**: Specify a fixed order (e.g. row-, column-major, or Morton
  order). When replacing existing chunks larger or equal-sized chunks may be
  replaced in-place, leaving unused space up to an upper limit that might
  possibly be specified. Please note that, for regular-sized uncompressed data,
  all chunks have the same size and can therefore be replaced in-place.
* **Append-only**: Any chunk to write is appended to the existing shard,
  followed by an updated index. If previous chunks are updated, their storage
  space becomes unused, as well as the previous index. This might be useful for
  storage that only allows append-only updates.
* **Other formats**: Other formats that accept additional bytes at the end of
  the file (such as HDF) could be used for storing shards, by writing the chunks
  in the order the format prescribes and appending a binary index derived from
  the byte offsets and lengths at the end of the file.

Any configuration parameters for the write strategy must not be part of the
metadata document; instead they need to be configured at runtime, as this is
implementation specific.


Implementation notes
====================

The section suggests a non-normative implementation of the codec including
common optimizations.

* **Decoding**: A simple implementation to decode chunks in a shard would (a) 
  read the entire value from the store into a byte buffer, (b) parse the shard
  index as specified above from the end of the buffer and (c) cut out the 
  relevant bytes that belong to the requested chunk. The relevant bytes are 
  determined by the `offset,nbytes` pair in the shard index. This bytestream
  then needs to be decoded with the inner codecs as specified in the sharding
  configuration applying the :ref:`decoding_procedure`. This is similar to how
  an implementation would access a sub-slice of a chunk.

  When reading all chunks of a shard at once, a useful optimization would be to 
  read the entire shard once into a byte buffer and then cut out and decode all 
  chunks from that buffer in one pass.

  If the underlying store supports partial reads, the decoding of single inner
  chunks can be optimized. In that case, the shard index can be read from the
  store by requesting the ``n`` last bytes, where ``n`` is 16 bytes multiplied 
  by the number of chunks in a shard. After parsing the shard index, single
  chunks can be requested from the store by specifing the byte range. The 
  bytestream, then, needs to be decoded as above. 

* **Encoding**: A simple implementation to encode a chunk in a shard would (a)
  encode the new chunk per :ref:`encoding_procedure` in a byte buffer using the 
  shard's inner codecs, (b) read an existing shard from the store, (c) create a 
  new bytestream with all encoded chunks of that shard including the overwritten 
  chunk, (d) generate a new shard index that is appended to the chunk bytestream 
  and (e) writes the shard to the store. If there was no existing shard, an 
  empty shard is assumed. When writing entire chunks, reading the existing shard 
  first may be skipped.

  When working with chunks that have a fixed byte size (e.g., uncompressed) and 
  a store that supports partial writes, a optimization would be to replace the
  new chunk by writing to the store at the specified byte range.

  Other use case-specific optimizations may be available, e.g., for append-only
  workloads.


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119

Change log
==========

This section is a placeholder for keeping a log of the snapshots of this
document that are tagged in GitHub and what changed between them.

Commit message:

V3 spec: add a 'codec name' paragraph in each codec specification (fixes #232)

docs/v3/codecs/sharding-indexed/v1.0.rst, after:

.. _sharding-indexed-codec-v1:

==========================================
Sharding codec (version 1.0)
==========================================
-----------------------------
 Editor's draft 23 03 2023
-----------------------------

Specification URI:
    https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/codecs/sharding-indexed/v1.0.html

Issue tracking:
    `GitHub issues <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/labels/sharding-indexed-codec-v1.0>`-

Suggest an edit for this spec:
    `GitHub editor <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/blob/main/docs/codecs/sharding-indexed/v1.0.rst>`_

Copyright 2022-Present `Zarr core development team
<https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/core-devs>`_. This work
is licensed under a `Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>`_.

----


Abstract
========

This specification defines a Zarr ``array -> bytes`` codec for sharding.

Sharding logically splits chunks ("shards") into sub-chunks ("inner chunks") 
that can be individually compressed and accessed. This allows to colocate 
multiple chunks within one storage object, bundling them in shards.


Motivation
==========

In many cases, it becomes inefficient or impractical to store a large number of
chunks as separate files or objects due to the design constraints of the
underlying storage. For example, the file block size and maximum inode number
restrict the usage of numerous small files for typical file systems, also cloud
storage such as S3, GCS, and various distributed filesystems do not efficiently
handle large numbers of small files or objects.

Increasing the chunk size works only up to a certain point, as chunk sizes need
to be small for read efficiency requirements, for example to stream data in 
browser-based visualization software.

Therefore, chunks may need to be smaller than the minimum size of one storage
key. In those cases, it is efficient to store objects at a more coarse
granularity than reading chunks.

**Sharding solves this by allowing to store multiple chunks in one storage key,
which is called a shard**:

.. image:: sharding.png


Document conventions
====================

Conformance requirements are expressed with a combination of descriptive
assertions and [RFC2119]_ terminology. The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT",
"REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" in the normative parts of this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC2119]_. However, for readability, these words do not appear in
all uppercase letters in this specification.

All of the text of this specification is normative except sections explicitly
marked as non-normative, examples, and notes. Examples in this specification are
introduced with the words "for example".


Codec name
==========

The value of the ``name`` member in the codec object MUST be ``sharding_indexed``.


Configuration parameters
========================

Sharding can be configured per array in the :ref:`array-metadata` as follows::

    {
      codecs: [
        {
          "name": "sharding_indexed"
          "configuration": {
            "chunk_shape": [32, 32],
            "codecs": [
              {
                "name": "gzip",
                "configuration": {
                  "level": 1
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }

``chunk_shape``

    An array of integers providing the shape of inner chunks in a shard for each 
    dimension of the Zarr array. The length of the array must match the length
    of the array metadata ``shape`` entry. The each integer must by divisible by 
    the ``chunk_shape`` of the array as defined in the ``chunk_grid`` 
    :ref:`array-metadata`. 
    For example, an inner chunk shape of ``[32, 2]`` with an outer chunk shape 
    ``[64, 64]`` indicates that 64 chunks are combined in one shard, 2 along the 
    first dimension, and for each of those 32 along the second dimension.
    Currently, only the ``regular`` chunk grid is supported.

``codecs``

    Specifies a list of codecs to be used for encoding and decoding inner chunks. 
    The value must be an array of objects, as specified in the 
    :ref:`array-metadata`. An absent ``codecs`` member is equivalent to 
    specifying an empty list of codecs.


Binary shard format
===================

This is an ``array -> bytes`` codec.

In the ``sharding_indexed`` binary format, chunks are written successively in a 
shard, where unused space between them is allowed, followed by an index 
referencing them. The index is placed at the end of the file and has a size of 
16 bytes multiplied by the number of chunks in a shard, for example 
``16 bytes * 4 = 1024 bytes`` for shard shape of ``[64, 64]`` and inner chunk 
shape of ``[32, 32]``. The index holds an `offset, nbytes` pair of little-endian 
uint64 per chunk, the chunks-order in the index is row-major (C) order. Given 
the example of 2x2 inner chunks in a shard, the index would look like::

    | chunk (0, 0)    | chunk (0, 1)    | chunk (1, 0)    | chunk (1, 1)    |
    | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes |
    | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 |

Empty chunks are denoted by setting both offset and nbytes to ``2^64 - 1``. 
Empty chunks are interpreted as being filled with the fill value. The index 
always has the full shape of all possible chunks per shard, even if they extend
beyond the array shape.

The actual order of the chunk content is not fixed and may be chosen by the
implementation. All possible write orders are valid according to this
specification and therefore can be read by any other implementation. When
writing partial chunks into an existing shard, no specific order of the existing
chunks may be expected. Some writing strategies might be

* **Fixed order**: Specify a fixed order (e.g. row-, column-major, or Morton
  order). When replacing existing chunks larger or equal-sized chunks may be
  replaced in-place, leaving unused space up to an upper limit that might
  possibly be specified. Please note that, for regular-sized uncompressed data,
  all chunks have the same size and can therefore be replaced in-place.
* **Append-only**: Any chunk to write is appended to the existing shard,
  followed by an updated index. If previous chunks are updated, their storage
  space becomes unused, as well as the previous index. This might be useful for
  storage that only allows append-only updates.
* **Other formats**: Other formats that accept additional bytes at the end of
  the file (such as HDF) could be used for storing shards, by writing the chunks
  in the order the format prescribes and appending a binary index derived from
  the byte offsets and lengths at the end of the file.

Any configuration parameters for the write strategy must not be part of the
metadata document; instead they need to be configured at runtime, as this is
implementation specific.


Implementation notes
====================

The section suggests a non-normative implementation of the codec including
common optimizations.

* **Decoding**: A simple implementation to decode chunks in a shard would (a) 
  read the entire value from the store into a byte buffer, (b) parse the shard
  index as specified above from the end of the buffer and (c) cut out the 
  relevant bytes that belong to the requested chunk. The relevant bytes are 
  determined by the `offset,nbytes` pair in the shard index. This bytestream
  then needs to be decoded with the inner codecs as specified in the sharding
  configuration applying the :ref:`decoding_procedure`. This is similar to how
  an implementation would access a sub-slice of a chunk.

  When reading all chunks of a shard at once, a useful optimization would be to 
  read the entire shard once into a byte buffer and then cut out and decode all 
  chunks from that buffer in one pass.

  If the underlying store supports partial reads, the decoding of single inner
  chunks can be optimized. In that case, the shard index can be read from the
  store by requesting the ``n`` last bytes, where ``n`` is 16 bytes multiplied 
  by the number of chunks in a shard. After parsing the shard index, single
  chunks can be requested from the store by specifing the byte range. The 
  bytestream, then, needs to be decoded as above. 

* **Encoding**: A simple implementation to encode a chunk in a shard would (a)
  encode the new chunk per :ref:`encoding_procedure` in a byte buffer using the 
  shard's inner codecs, (b) read an existing shard from the store, (c) create a 
  new bytestream with all encoded chunks of that shard including the overwritten 
  chunk, (d) generate a new shard index that is appended to the chunk bytestream 
  and (e) writes the shard to the store. If there was no existing shard, an 
  empty shard is assumed. When writing entire chunks, reading the existing shard 
  first may be skipped.

  When working with chunks that have a fixed byte size (e.g., uncompressed) and 
  a store that supports partial writes, a optimization would be to replace the
  new chunk by writing to the store at the specified byte range.

  Other use case-specific optimizations may be available, e.g., for append-only
  workloads.


References
==========

.. [RFC2119] S. Bradner. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels. March 1997. Best Current Practice. URL:
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119

Change log
==========

This section is a placeholder for keeping a log of the snapshots of this
document that are tagged in GitHub and what changed between them.
